Well, I was born in 1929 in Germany, to be specific,
in Königsberg, which was in Eastern Prussia,
which was home. The parents, however, came from
central and southern Germany. My father had been
teaching economics, and of course, by being in
university, you change. And during the period
until the beginning of the war, World War II, he was
on the assistant and associate professor level,
so it was a well-to-do family, although the saying
there was, being a professor, you either have a
perambulator or you have a car, and so we had the
perambulator. But it was, as I said, quite
well-to-do middle class. When the war started, I
was 10 years old, that was 1939, And six years
later, in early 45, I'm sorry, in early 45, 945, we
just got away one or two days ahead of the Soviet
army and got out over the Baltic and ended up in the
mountains of southeastern most Bavaria,
opposite corner, sort of, of the empire. Well,
after the war, I first worked for a year or so in a
nursery, growing first cabbages and then later on
advancing to fixing graves. But a year later, when
my father had come back from prison camp and things
settled down a little, I went back to school and
received my high school degree, sort of high
school degree, in 1947.
in Europe, or most of Europe at least, central
Europe at least, the high school degree
corresponds to an education vaguely equivalent
to a college sophomore year. So I was a little
farther advanced than a high school graduate
here. And I would also say that in those years
because of the war that one was a little more mature
than an ordinary 18 years old would be today. So the
choice of what to do was not as bad or as unclear as it
very often is nowadays. I had wavered between, I
wanted to go to college, to university, which in
those years, or in that country, was not as open in
those years as it is now, but perhaps 10% or so, or
not even 10%, the year class went to the
university. At any rate, I wanted to proceed and
had wavered for quite a while to go into economics
because of my father's profession, and biology.
and the biology came about by the influence of a
childhood friend, where the high school had
really no influence at all, because it was
entirely language-oriented.
So I decided to go into biology, and the
professional goal was to become a high school
teacher, on the continent is a very prestigious
job. And as far as the training goes, the
university career, one is being trained in the
ordinary university department rather than as it
is here put into a school of education. And
therefore after having ended I could easily
switch into the scientific career, which would be
very difficult here. Because in those years the
admissions were quite limited because many
universities were being destroyed and of course
all the people coming back from the war or those who
did come back wanting to study. Therefore, as I
said, the admission was limited and I had to sort of
shop around who would take me, apply as graduate
students do it now, apply at five or six different
universities. And just to give you a feel,
Göttingen, which was the top science university
then, just laughed at me and said, well, it's your
grades. I had a D in Latin and a good C in Greek, I
think an A in English, and Bs or so in the sciences
and in German. They just said no. And Göttingen had
five Nobel Prize laureates, so they sort of could
afford to beat me.
I was accepted in Heidelberg and began then to
study biology, which really meant to study botany
as well as zoology, because that is just the way
it's set up. And as minors, I had chosen chemistry
and geography. The training was, again, in
American standards, to be a little more... to
explain a little more to the American listener how
this... what my training had been. The training in
biology was, or in sciences in general, was quite
unquantitative in the physics, for example,
which was introductory lecture for all
scientists, the calculus was barely touched
upon, and in the introductory chemistry, again,
introductory for chemists as well as for people
like me, and in biology, mathematics was
practically not being used, which resulted in a
fairly unquantitative training, overall
training of biologists, and I believe that has not
changed very much, and that is one of my principal
weaknesses in hindsight.
I studied biology, geography, and chemistry, and
for a while was tempted to become a geographer
because it just seemed very interesting, and I
mentioned that because I still have geographical
leanings. But the field was so overrun that I
thought, well, it wouldn't lead anywhere. And, in
effect, for these sort of fairly rational
reasons, decided against it. And also there was
another... more irrational reason was there was a
Banzer or the same name geographer who had been a
very nice party man and so whenever I went on
excursions somebody politely asked are you
perhaps related to Banzer or you are not related to
Banzer I hope and so I thought no let's stick to
biology
now as I said it was 47 I think I said it was 1947 And
most of the students were of advanced age by having
just coming back from the war. The universities
opened in 46 or 47 only. And very young students, me
being 18, were admitted. So the atmosphere was
really dominated by the war generation. And these
people didn't fool around as normally one does in
the universities in the first one or two years, but
began to study right away. And, of course, we were
carried along. This is important. Again, I may
interject that in the old days, and it persists
until now, I guess, on the continent, there were
very few examinations. You entered, and it was
only 10% of the year class, so if you entered, then
usually you made it. That means you entered, if you
had an adequate high school certificate, you had a
reasonable expectation to finish. And in my case,
for example, I entered in 47%. and had received the
PhD in 55, there was no examination in the entire
period excepting a few lab tests in chemistry,
none examination whatsoever, which of course
made fooling around relatively easy. But as I
said, the atmosphere was not like that so that I was
sort of automatically conditioned to study like
the other people who knew exactly what they wanted
and that they wanted to get out fast.
Now, that there are no examination may sound a
little strange, but there was some, the teachers
could assess the students, because a very
important tool of education there is, after the
first one or two years, is to take seminars and give
speeches. And these seminars mean that you
disappear for a month or so in the library, not be
seen. Just drop all lectures and do your seminar,
prepare your seminar, which means, of course,
independent study. And you stand and fall,
really, on these seminars. In these seminars, the
PhD candidates are being picked. In the others, I
just go on for whatever.
Yeah, I guess that is all about the undergraduate
years. Yeah, there were, of course, money
problems, no state support, and you had to have
private support, but because the economy was
pretty bad, fathers had died in the war or were
unemployed, so many had to scrounge more than
usually, and I, for example, had to work one summer
in a mine, coal mine, just to make money, which
didn't do any harm, but it was an interesting
experience, obviously, to work at 2,000 feet
below ground level. All right, that is the
undergraduate time. Now, again, in Central
Europe, I think it is quite common or almost
expected from you that you change your university
to just be exposed to different teachers. And in my
case, I left Heidelberg in 1949 and chose to go to
Kiel. The purpose of changing was to beef up my
zoology because I thought I had gotten a good
background in botany and geography had dropped,
chemistry was sort of taken care of, so what was
left was zoology. And there were only, in that
time, only three universities which had
worthwhile zoology. Three out of, I don't
remember, 17 or so. And the two of the
universities, well, one was Göttingen, which
didn't like me anyway, and one was in southern
Germany, and the other one, the third one, was
Kiel. I wanted to go back to northern Germany, so
that is how I got to Kiel. The timing, the choice of
why in that semester was because the university
authorities thought of introducing
intermediate examinations to weed out people.
And I thought it was so horrible in thought and
infringement on everything academic freedom
stood for that I thought they must get along
without me. And so I went to Kiel. The first year
there was largely to be devoted to invertebrates.
And again, that is a little different from here,
the situation here. in your major then you spent on
the what is equivalent to the graduate level
essentially all day six days a week in those years
morning to night in the what you would call here the
lab which is combined lab and the neuroscience and
lecture and so on so the first year was to be devoted
to invertebrates and the shareholder the
principal teacher was remana who's name i've
written down who is known in this country as being
the inventor of benthic male fauna work but who has
done very much more than that he was in great
morphologist and comparative anatomy new
ecology natural history ecology sort of and also
was a very convincing teacher and human being, so
that it was natural that you were carried along by
him, and that it was natural that he determined the
whole atmosphere in that place.
And it would have been natural, really, to
continue with him, but after a week or two, one late
afternoon, two of my colleagues in that lab got up
early and went away looking at their watches, and I
asked, well, where are you going? And the answer
was, well, we are going to a seminar in
oceanography, in the Institute of Oceanography,
or perhaps more properly called Institute of
Oceanology, because it comprises all the
branches of oceanography. And I sort of, being
tired of drawing, making drawings of
cross-sectional, where it was, I said, well, all
right, may I come along? And they said, yes. that is
interesting what I'm telling now is that I really
got by accident into oceanography because until
that afternoon I had never realized that this was a
discipline of its own
in spite of the geography training but well the
ocean just wasn't there sort of now what it was was
where we went to was their first seminar the
opening afternoon they had been There had been an
Institute of Oceanography before, before the
war, but they had been bombed out and everybody was
killed, man and mouse, as we say. The library went
up in flames. And that semester, winter semester
of 49 to 50, they had finally moved into permanent
quarters, which was a converted large home,
mansion-type home. And so now I had the
possibility to have a lecture hall and offer a
seminar, and so that was the occasion. So we went
there and found five professors and, oh, I don't
know, six, eight students sitting there, and then
the three of us entering, so it was an unusual
student-to-teacher ratio. And in front at the
podium was Professor Wüst, or Wüst, as we say in
Germany, who was its shareholder. which means the
director of the institute and the one who had to
stay. There were four other professors whom we
would call here associate professors, but who in
that hierarchical structure never could be
promoted to full professor because the budget for
the institute had one full professor. And as long
as the full professor was there, the others were
forced to remain associate professors, one for
algae, one for zoology, and so on. And Wüst, as I
implied or said, conducted the seminar, which,
and said by means of introduction that this was in
part an exercise for students and in part for
mutual education, it would be run like a sort of
journal club. And you, Ms. So-and-so, wouldn't
you be interested in reviewing such and such? and
so on, and of course picked the people he knew who
were sort of accepted PhD candidates among these
six or eight first, and then in the end there was
still a pile, a big pile of books on the, or articles
on the table, and so wouldn't you, I don't know your
name, addressing me, be interested in reviewing
this book, and I can't really read it, he said, But I
have been assured it's interesting, and now what
does a young student say? Yes, sir. And it turned
out to be 200 pages in Swedish on the carbonate
system in seawater, in the Baltic Sea, by Buch, who
is an outstanding, one of the leading chemical
oceanographers of those days, Buch in Finland.
And I had two months. over the Christmas vacation
two months' time to learn Swedish and learn the
subject matter and then deliver, which I did, and
fairly successfully, because from the sort of
capital I had accumulated by that performance in
front of all the professors, I lived then for the
next two or three years. But it was a little
difficult, because the new subject and then the
Swedish language, which turned out to be much more
difficult than I had thought.
I thought it was difficult. Oh, no. No, no. I have
transcribers who will understand it. Okay. All
right. Well, and during these two months, I had to
ask, of course, many questions and learn to meet
these people. And as I said, because of the
favorable student-to-professor ratio, which
was very unusual for those days in these crowded
universities, I just met living professors. and
establish a personal relation to them, so that
there was really a temptation right away to stay,
especially with Kribe, who was the plantologist
and also took care of the nutrient chemistry.
There was no chemist proper. But then, on the other
hand, Riemann had suggested already the subject
for the PhD thesis to work on the head development
of amphipodes. and for a year I sort of vacillated,
didn't quite know what to do. Maintaining a seat in
the zoology department, but already going out on
cruises with these oceanographers and working
upon urging by Krai on alkalinity, which was what
his paper by Buch had been about, really.
But a year later then, yeah, and I'm sorry, and
Krai, what Krai wanted to have done is really in
continuation of the work of his teacher,
Wattenberg, who had been the chemist that killed,
who had been killed, however, during the war. And
Krai thought it was natural to continue. After
all, I had mastered the literature, and so why
shouldn't I continue, and so on and so forth. But a
year later then, I decided, first of all, the
geologist told me, now either you start seat or
just place and I said well alright I'm becoming
oceanographer but I also decided then within
oceanography that I could not possibly that it
would be very unwise to work on this alkalinity
business because then as a thesis I would have
probably been good thesis subject but I would be
labeled as a chemist and I didn't have the chemist
training so I said to Kai that would i would be happy
to stay become your student but not with this
subject which took him a while to understand but
well what he then said is well uh i just received
this book here which i have here which is by torson
which came out in 46 and was the reproduction of
reproduction and larval development of danish
marine bottom invertebrates which is a sort of
bible for many of us in those years because it
opened a new field the larval the pelagic larvae of
bottom invertebrates as a part of the life history
of benthic animals and As you see, it's very thick,
so it is in the Bible in the sense of that you should
look very often in it, into it, and remind yourself
of what's being said. And Christ said, well, why
not do the same in Kielbein? And again, that had to
do with earlier work by Wattenberg, his teacher
whom I had mentioned. who had already worked on the
issue of the transport of marine animals from the
North Sea through the Danish waters, Danish
Straits, into the Baltic. And the Baltic has very
much lower salinity, so that many species don't
intrude into the Baltic, but the keel bay is a sort
of transition area. And what Kai suggested, a
little naively, but in a sense it was right, was to
study the factors which limit or delimit a
distribution of the species.
Now, I began to work on it through the literature. I
had to still to take courses and went in 1951 to 1952
to Sweden. And that had several reasons. One of it
was that my father, who had to pay all these
studies, said, well, I have now the money to allow
you to go abroad, which is, of course, always a very
good suggestion.
I had realized that the library, anywhere in
Germany, the library facilities would be too poor
because of the losses in the war to work through the
literature which Thorsten had used. So I tried to
reread all the papers on larval development and
sort them out in a different way. because Thorson
had dedicated this book to Johann Petersen, who is
the inventor of quantitative benthic research
and who had been his teacher in Denmark. And
Petersen had worked in the early part of the
century. And the dedication was more than a token
because, as I implied earlier, the book was really
written or was concerned with the pelagic larva as
a stage in the life history of a bottom animal. And
my idea was to ask in the thesis, what can we learn by
looking at the larvae as an pelagic animal? Never
mind that it has to land on the bottom, but what does
it do while it is in the plankton? That was the sort
of core idea. And so I wanted to read the literature
he had reviewed once more to see whether he had not
omitted certain things. And of course, I wanted to
be up on the most recent literature, the last half
decade after the war. And so that is what I then
connected with going to Sweden. So I studied in
Lund at the University of Lund in southern Sweden
first. Not really studied, but essentially
worked at the library. and during the summer of 52
then went to the Swedish Skagrak coast which has
very much higher salinity than Kiel Bay to see the
larvae actually. Of course I had other ideas in my
mind too but in hindsight this is what I learned to
see the living animals before I started to study
them in Kiel Bay.
The Thorson Bible is about all bottom
invertebrates but It seemed obvious that I
couldn't treat all of them. I had to specialize in
one or two groups, two of them being very, very good
and also having helpers, but I thought, well, and
everybody advised, well, you can't work as
comprehensively if you ever want to finish in a
reasonable time. And I had asked Thorsen, what
would you suggest, which group should I pick? And
Thorsen had immediately said, well, obviously
the mollusks and perhaps the bivalves, because
they are least known, and there you easily can find
new things.
But I thought, well, I'm not interested in
describing new larvae, but I would like to know
what larvae do, never mind what they belong to.
decided that I rather should settle on that group
which is best known so that I do not have to worry
about identification that I just identifying I
would just go to the keys and begin counting in
order to make statements about the ecology so I
picked echinoderms on that account which at that
time were the best known by about larvae with hard
parts easy to identify and so on But then I realized
also that there are very few echinoderms living in
the Bay of Keel because of the low salinity. Most of
them drop out earlier. And so I had to pick another
group. And the choice was then polychaetes. And
that was sort of half rational, half irrational.
The rational part was, yes, I needed another
group, reasonably well known. And the sort of, not
irrational is too much, but The other part of my
thinking was that the zoologist among these
professors I had mentioned in the oceanography
department, Friedrich, as we say, who later went
to Bremerhaven and wrote a textbook there, many
people still use, he was an ecologist and
physiologist, but his taxonomic specialty had
been polychaetes. polychaetes are very
important on the seabed, half of the species also
are polychaetes, and I thought, well, if
Friedrich leaves, well, somebody has to identify
polychaetes, and so I chose polychaetes. And that
sounds now a little more cunning than I actually
was, but I thought it was an empty niche, and why
shouldn't I occupy it, sort of? And that is then
what I studied on the Swedish Skagrak coast, and in
the library, the echinoderm and polychaete
larvae.
And while in Lund, thinking about it, how to do it,
what to do, when coming back, what courses to make,
the sort of revelation, if I may put it this way, it
really came one night, laying in bed, out of the
blue, how to sample was to forget about the nets, as
all people had worked before on plankton, with
nets, but to use a plankton pump. That is the key of
the success, that I settled on a tool which allows
you to lower the hose into one spot at depth and take
out so much water as you need, which means that, in
contrast to a net which you tow over a certain
distance and you never quite know where you were
and what the salinity was and so on. So the fact that
I showed the sampling tool, which not only where I
was not only sure how much water was sampled, but I
also was sure where the sample had been taken from,
which allowed me also to take phytoplankton
samples and salinity samples and, in other words,
to describe the environment. That, in hindsight,
turned out to be the key to the success. I did all the
collection in 1953. And during that time, I
increased the number of stations ever worked on
with the pump by an order of magnitude. There had
been four stations by Torsen and two or three
elsewhere, but I had 10 times as many, which of
course helped. and defended the thesis in 1955.
Let me just say one more thing about the pump series
by Thorsen. Thorsen had used a pump, a hand-driven
pump, as you use in a farmer's yard, which is in a
very laborious way, three or four times during his
studies, and had given the original data, and
while looking at the data, I thought that the
interpretation he gave to that must- can't
possibly be right. And In a way, the thesis starts
out from, or the whole approach started out from
looking at these curves and saying Torsten's
interpretation can't be right. And in a way, also
later, I have, many of my papers are really built on
mistakes by others that I, rather than starting
out from scratch, that I just read the literature
and thought, well, that doesn't sound right.
doesn't hold water and shouldn't I check it and
well as I said many of my papers are based on the
mistakes of others which however I think many
other people do few have an idea completely out of
the blue but they start out from somewhere and well
I started out from the mistakes of others so
that was then the thesis where I counted about
1,000 samples or so just to give you a feel for the
magnitude of the effort. It really was sitting on
the microscope and not worrying about girls or
things, but really work. But concurrently still
thinking of, or really being urged by cry, All
right, go for the PhD, but I don't know of any
position, so don't gamble on now that you will
become an oceanographer, but continue with your
teacher's training, take that botany course,
which was utterly boring, and do this and do that in
order to have all right the PhD, but have a living
income by becoming a high school teacher.
Because at that time, the German education, the
German universities were still sort of limping
along because there was not just enough money
around. And before the war, they had been the same
way, and Christ sort of remembered that, how
difficult it was to make a living as a scientist.
And it was reasonable to suggest, well, play it
safe.
In addition to this counting and then this going to
boring courses, I wrote already some papers on
larvae development of polychaetes because I did
run into new larvae and it was obvious to describe
this separately rather than put them into the big
thesis. And of course also by necessity I became
acquainted with the taxonomy of the adults so that
I could identify polychaetes. And this is an
important point which will come up later.